---
title: 'The Generic Travel Survey Process'
categories:
  - Survey Manual
---
### Commercial-Vehicle-Surveys

 Structure of this chapter is based on Chapter 9 of the FHWA Travel Survey Manual  
Material has been reviewed and updated by Frank Southworth; Rob Tardif; Zak Patterson; Chris Simek; and Stephanie McVey  
  
Commercial vehiclesurveys are used to collect profiles of goods and commoditymovements, and truck and commercial vehicle characteristics, withinparticular areas of study. Surveys of this type have been conductedfor several reasons, including for use in statewide, regional,subarea, and local travel forecasting models, in goods movementstudies, in management systems (in particular, intermodal andcongestion management systems), as well as in international bordercrossing freight movement studies.   


At this point intime, commercial vehicle surveys are not typically performed tosupport most statewide and Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO)travel model forecasting efforts. In most cases, states and MPOsestimate commercial and truck travel models outside of the formaltravel modeling process. Secondary data sources are often used aspost-processors to develop commercial/truck vehicle trip tables andmodels. However, as the analysis of commercial vehicle travel becomesmore important in urban planning, the collection of commercialvehicle survey data will become quite important, as well. [Lau (1995)](/References.html "References") provides a comprehensive overview and analysis of the types, uses, methods, response rates, and comparisons of recently collected commercial vehicle data in metropolitan areas throughout the United States. It also describes the needs and requirements of commercial/truck data collected to support regional travel models as well as the MPO transportation planning and management system (pavement, bridge, etc.) process. See also [Lawson and Stratham (2002)](/References.html "References").   


A number of research reports discuss this topic of combining travel survey data with additional forms of non-intrusive, IT-based data collection ([Skszek, 2001; TRB, 2003; Southworth 2004](/References.html "References")), including the use of GPS technology for vehcile tracking (see Battelle, 1999) and growing number of active and passive and other roadside, on-board the vehicle and wide area sensors, including developments under the US Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration's CVISN program ([http://cvisn.fmcsa.dot.gov/](http://cvisn.fmcsa.dot.gov/ "http://cvisn.fmcsa.dot.gov/")).

GPS seems particularly well suited for commercial vehicles. Since thetravel patterns of vehicles, rather than persons, are desired, the useof a GPS device on the vehicle is more likely to be accepted by therespondent. GPS also greatly reduces the burden on the respondent sincedestinations would not have to be recorded. This could be a substantialadvantage for vehicles that make many stops per day. The use of RFIDtechnology to track cargo movements by truck, rail, water and air isalso now spreading across the freight movement industry (<http://www.rfidjournal.com/>).   


**Assembly of Background Information**
--------------------------------------

  Three types of background data are likely to be especially helpful to the survey team: 

* Available commodity survey data;
* Data on the commercial vehicle population; and
* Commercial vehicle flow data.

These data are discussed below. 

Available Commodity Survey Data
-------------------------------

 Typically, secondary data sources are used tomodel and forecast commercial vehicle travel patterns in lieu ofcollecting new survey data. Although there are a number of sources ofdata required to support commercial vehicle surveying efforts, there islittle information collected by others which can be used directly inthe development of truck/commercial travel models. Ideally, availablerecent survey data should provide information on commercial vehicletrips by origin and destination, vehicle type, commodity type, andtime-of-day. 

 Followinga sixteen year hiatus in federal freight activity data collection the1993, 1997 and 2002 U.S. Commodity Flow Surveys (CFS)  filled a largegap in this U.S. freight data universe. Since 2005 this gap has beenfurther reduced by a merging of CFS data with many other federallysupported freight and trade (inmpors and exports) data sources, andcombined using a variety of data intergation and synthesis methods toproduce a more comprehensive picture of US freight activity for theyears 1998 and 2002. Termed the Freight Analysis Framework, or FAF,this FHWA supported data and analysis program provides access tocommodity flow matrices broken down by major commodity and modalclasses. Limitedin its level of spatial resolution has limitations the followinglimitations to 131 domestic and international traffic analysis zoned,the FAF can be used to provide control totals, notably of externalflows into and out of major metropolitan areas, border crossinggateways and rest-of-state regions. Built around the CFS it alsoprovides useful value to weight (i.e. dollar per ton) and broadregional commodity by mode trip length statistics. It cannotsubstitute, however, more more detailed spatial and commodity classspecific truck or other modal flow data: and the microdata recordscollected as part of the nation's Commodity Flow Surveys have remainedunavailable for general use due to strict controls over the release ofpotentially proprietary data collected as part of the US EconomicCensus.  A detailed examination of the content and limitations of CFSdata can be found in the 2005 TRB Conference Proceedings devotedexclusively to this topic ([TRB, 2006](/References.html "References")).At the local level, systematic surveys of trucktravel are generally unavailable. The closest to the type ofinformation desired by urban planners and travel modelers are usuallythe trip logs maintained by many commercial vehicle operators such asdelivery services (United Parcel Service and Federal Express), theUnited States Postal Service, and many on-site repair establishments.Although these trip logs can be used to create limited commercialvehicle trip tables, they are the property of the privately heldbusinesses/establishments, and are therefore difficult to obtain. Potentially, an aspect of a survey team’scommercial vehicle surveying effort could be to request the voluntaryprovision of these commercial vehicle trip logs for a sample of localestablishments. In addition, survey teams could also obtain applicableinformation from the CFS in order to supplement the primary datacollection efforts envisioned for the survey effort. ### Data on the Commercial Vehicle Population

Two data sources have typically been used toprovide transportation planners and modelers with commercial vehiclepopulation information which can be sampled to obtain commercialvehicle travel data: 

* Vehicle registration lists; and
* Commercial establishment lists.

Vehicle registration lists by vehicle type andowner address are generally available to local planners and travelmodelers from Departments of Motor Vehicles (DMVs). The vehicle typeclassifications from these lists may or may not meet the planners’needs, depending on whether or not vehicle weight and type codes aremaintained in the files, and on whether or not licenses aredifferentiated by vehicle type. There may also be problems inidentifying passenger vehicles, pickup trucks, and small delivery vansused commercially. This source typically fails to match the populationof vehicles actually operating in the study area because commercialvehicle ownership, garaging, and usage often involves two or morelocations, some of which may be outside of the study area and thereforeimpossible to survey. A second type of data source is an establishmentlisting. Commercial establishment lists are available in many forms,ranging from telephone listings to publicly maintained lists.Typically, State Departments which administer unemployment and workcompensation insurance programs and proprietary databases created for sale by private firms, such as Dun and Bradstreet, maintain these listings. No source will provide perfect data for the surveysampling frame. Potential problems involved with data obtained fromthese lists include: * The lack of coverage of branch office operations in employment-based lists;
* Lists can become out of date relatively quickly;
* The lack of not-for-profit and governmental organizations in the listings; and
* The lack of employers with small numbers of workers.

An additional difficulty in using lists of thistype is that they typically include many establishments which do notoperate commercial vehicles. This leads to low survey eligibilityrates, which, in turn, lead to increased data collection costsand longer than estimated field periods. Itis for this reason that it can be useful to stratifybusinesses/employers by SIC/NAICS code to target industries most likelyto operate commercial vehicles (See Section on Sampling below). zak patterson 10/23/08 10:48 AM  ### Commercial Vehicle Flow Data

Information on commercial vehicle flows is oftenvaluable for model validation. This information can also be used tomonitor commercial traffic into and out of major facilities such aslarge warehouses, piggyback rail yards, and ports. Whenstate-of-the-art technology is available, classification counts basedon the number of axles and length per vehicle can be obtainedautomatically at traffic count stations. More typically, planners andmodelers must rely on available short-term manual classificationcounts, frequently collected as part of traffic operation and impactstudies. Fischer and Han (2001) review the use of  these and other datasources for creating a set of truck trip generation rates for use inplanning models. -Frank Southworth 10/3/08 4:35 PM   **9.2 Commercial Vehicle Survey Design**  The most basic design decision for the commercialvehicle survey team is the selection of the appropriate surveypopulation and unit of analysis. Commercial vehicle surveys can beperformed by sampling: * Commercial vehicle trips at certain geographic locations;
* The commercial vehicles themselves; or
* The establishments that commercial vehicles serve.

If the vehicle trip is chosen as the unit ofanalysis, the commercial vehicle survey is a simple extension to thevehicle intercept survey described in Chapter 7.0. When the intercept method is insufficient for theanticipated analyses, a general population survey is needed. Often, thepopulation chosen for analysis is the commercial vehicles registered inthe study area. In this type of survey, the survey team contacts theowners of a sample of the vehicles, and requests them to providedetailed travel information for the vehicle.  Some larger truck fleetshave been equipped with GPS tracking devices that allow fleet managersto locate trucks at any given moment. These systems can be usedeffectively for gathering truck-specific travel patterns continuously, with dwell times and other infrastructurespecific operations information between origin-destination pairs withmeasures of speed and congestion systems performance, fuel consumptionand hard brake events (Tardif R., 2007) -Rob Tardif 10/28/08 5:49 PM data with little effort by respondents. Untilall trucks are equipped with GPS tracking devices and all of theirinformation shared for transportation planning purposes, the uses ofthis unique data are likely to be limited to micro and macro operationsanalysis.  While the activities of large samples of carriers equippedwith GPS tracking produce traffic flows and select link matrices thatsupport mapping analysis, expansion of these samples requires detailedlink level hourly truck classification counts to expand to the truckpopulation.   -Rob Tardif 10/28/08 6:04 PM A major advantage ofthis approach is that registered vehicle data can usually be obtainedfrom local DMVs at little cost. The major disadvantage is that vehicleregistration lists do not typically match the commercial vehiclepopulation in an urban areas since many trucks notregistered in the areas will be garaged and operated within the area,and conversely many commercial vehicles registered in the area willtypically operate elsewhere. Because of the problem with using the registeredvehicle as the unit of analysis, many commercial vehicle surveysconcentrate instead on establishments (see Chapter 10).-Frank Southworth 10/3/08 4:44 PM Theadvantage of using employers as the population to be sampled is thatnearly all commercial vehicle activity in a region is associated withemployment, either of the shipment originator, receiver, vehicleoperator, or a combination of the three. Exceptions to this rule ofthumb include rare cases of deliveries to households from externalstudy area locations by operators also based outside of the study area.The disadvantages of using employers include the following: * Many businesses have very limited connections with commercial vehicle trips;
* Establishing a comprehensive population of employers is often difficult;
* The costs-Frank Southworth 10/3/08 4:43 PM    Costs of contacting the number of employers necessary to obtain a specified vehicle sample size may be significant; and
* Two-stage, or stratified sampling is required to account for thevarying number of commercial vehicles associated with employers ofdifferent sizes and types.

The choice of the unit of analysis is likely todepend mainly on the anticipated modeling needs, but also on theschedule and resources available to implement the commercial vehiclesurvey. A survey based on vehicle registrations can usually beconducted less expensively. However, the primary benefit of a surveybased on employers will be that it more accurately represents theentire commercial vehicle population in the particular study area. ### General Fieldwork Approach

The fundamental design problem typically faced bysurveyors is how to obtain travel behavior information directly fromthe truck/vehicle operators. In most cases, owners of private truckingand commercial businesses are not willing participants in this type ofsurvey effort, especially if they are asked to provide operationalinformation about their particular business. Past commercial vehiclesurveys have shown that response rates may be increased by obtainingthe support of the local or state motor trucking association. Theseorganizations act as intermediaries between theirconstituent organization and the government entity often sponsoring orfunding the survey effort and can be invaluable in promoting thesurvey. (Hunt, Stefan and Brownlee, 2006) Chris Simek 10/8/08 4:38 PM  InCanada, federal and provincial transport agencies conduct nationalcarrier roadside surveys as part of the Transport Canada - NationalRoadside Survey (NRS) every 5 to 6 years in conjunction withenforcement staff with 95% response rates.  Traditionally, carrierassociations have supported these data collection efforts since theseagencies have proven the link between improved truck activityknowledge and direct freight supportive infrastructure investmentsbased on the time-series data. -Rob Tardif 10/28/08 6:25 PM  In addition, the survey design must include aconvenient mechanism to obtain travel information directly from thevehicle operator, which is not always evident. Therefore, creativemethods for obtaining important travel behavior from the appropriatebusinesses must be built into the survey design process. Standarddesign features for the commercial survey include the following steps: * Contact businesses to obtain approval for survey participation;
* Identify survey method;
* Develop data recording method; and
* Develop survey expansion method.

 Recent experience in Chicago, Phoenix, AlamedaCounty (California), and Houston has shown that the followingmulti-step approach is necessary to conduct and administer a successfulcommercial vehicle survey: * **Contact Businesses –** Initial contacts with business ownersor employers should be established by telephone. Supplemental contactsshould be made by mail and/or in person (particularly for operators oflarge fleets) to recruit survey participants. Typically, the surveymail-out instrument requests establishment, vehicle, and travelbehavior data (trip diary forms) for a single-travel day. Dataretrieval is usually conducted either by mailback or telephone contact.Attempts to simplify this process to a mailout/mailback strategyhave been made in at least one recent truck survey (in Phoenix) whichwas based on vehicle registration data. However, because the responserates were so low in the pretest, the approach was revised to representthe approach described above (this comment needs a source reference) -Frank Southworth 10/3/08 4:46 PM . Incentives (e.g. chance to win a prize for participation) can help to increase response rates. zak patterson 10/23/08 10:50 AM Details and potential refinements of this general fieldworkstrategy are discussed in subsequent sections of this chapter. Animportant issue to address during the survey design is the degree ofcoordination between the commercial vehicle survey, workplace surveys,and vehicle intercept surveys discussed in Chapters 10.0 and 7.0respectively. For example, if an employer database is used as thesampling frame, then the procedures used to design the workplace andestablishment survey should be combined with those documented below.This will minimize the effort required for meeting data needs andreduce the number of business/employer contacts that have to be made.Similarly, specific truck movements may be well captured by vehicleintercept surveys, reducing the data needs for the commercial vehiclesurvey.
* **Data Recording Methods –** Typically, the recruitment of businesses/employers to survey is conducted through by -Frank Southworth 10/3/08 4:48 PM obtainingvehicle registrations or by contacting businesses directly bytelephone. Data retrieval and recording methods for each include thefollowing approaches: second level bullets added below by Frank Southworth 10/3/08 4:53 PM 
	+ Vehicle registration information is obtained through theDepartment of Motor Vehicles. Recruitment of businesses for surveyparticipation are typically obtained through telephone contacts and theuse of CATI.
	+ Retrieval of survey forms is handled by either providing envelopeswith return of address and postage or mailback postcard forms. Returnedsurveys, using either method, are directly input into establishedcomputer databases or by using telephone/CATI. CATI is used to directlyenter survey responses for several survey types discussed in thismanual.
	+ Employer contacts and subsequent survey recruitment are typicallymade by telephone and CATI. In some cases, personal contact is made bysending out initial survey participation forms designed to obtainbusiness participation in the survey. Data entry and retrieval usesimilar methods described above for the vehicle registration approach.
* **Survey Expansion Method –** The survey expansion methods typically used for each approach described above are presented below. For the vehicle registration approach, the sample expansion method includes: 
	+ Developing a vehicle factor based on the number of vehicleregistrations divided by the number of responses by weightclassification or truck type; and
	+ Developing a trip factor based on the total number oftrips per truck obtained from the trip diary forms (typically, eachvehicle operator is asked for detailed travel behavior information fora limited number of trips, e.g., for a given period, day, or week).

     The sample expansion method typically used for the employer contact approach includes: + Developing an establishment factor based on the number ofemployers divided by the number of establishments participating in thesurvey;
+ Developing a matrix based on employer size, business type (SICcode), and/or geography (location) in order to define the establishmentfactor identified above;
+ Developing a vehicle factor based on the number of vehicles usedby a given establishment divided by the number of employers surveyed(this factor can be truck type-specific); and
+ Developing a trip factor using similar methods described above for the vehicle registration approach.

 9.3 Organizing the Commercial Vehicle Survey
----------------------------------------------

As specified above, the design of the commercialvehicle survey typically considers the vehicle registration or employercontact approach. If the employer contact approach is used, closecoordination with the development and implementation of the workplaceand establishment survey is desirable. Similar to the other surveytypes identified in this manual, and once the businesses for surveyinghave been identified, the following design issues must be determined: * What is the appropriate survey approach?  This is already described in the previous paragraph. Remove this bullet point ? -zak patterson 10/23/08 10:51 AM
* Should the surveys be conducted using telephone interviews or be self-administered?
* What count data are needed for the survey and how can it be obtained?
* Should incentives for participating in the survey be offered?

The fieldwork approach must be identified in thebeginning stages of the survey effort. General descriptions of the twotypically used approaches, vehicle registrations and employer contacts,are discussed in detail in Section 9.2 Once this approach is identified, the survey design must be determined. The survey This -Frank Southworth 10/3/08 4:58 PM designshould consider either the initial telephone contact, mail-out, andfollow-up telephone contact/CATI approach or the mail-out,self-administered questionnaire, and mail-back approach to obtain thetravel behavior information required for analysis and travel modeling.Both designs have been used for surveys of this type, with the higherresponse rates associated with the telephoneinterviews. Similar to other survey types, telephone interviews aretypically conducted by specialized market research firms. Theprocedures required for implementation of telephone surveys arediscussed in greater detail in Chapter 6.0. The problematic issue associated with conductingtelephone interviews for this type of survey is to identify theappropriate mechanism to directly contact the commercial vehicleoperators. As stated previously, this direct operator contact isessential to ensure that the proper level of trip-making and travelbehavior data is obtained. Other potential contact persons at employersand businesses include dispatchers and business owners that may be ableto answer specific travel behavior logistics -Frank Southworth 10/3/08 4:59 PM questions about their commercial vehicle fleet. Online alternatives to conducting surveys are also becoming more commonly used.zak patterson 10/23/08 10:54 AM  With the self-administered surveys, similar andadditional problematic issues must be addressed in order to meet theneeds of the survey. For example, a mechanism has to be identified todistribute the survey material from the employer/owner to theappropriate vehicle operators. This must be defined early on in thesurvey design once the self-administered survey is selected. Typically,the distribution of questionnaire forms is administered by the businessemployers’ owner or fleet dispatcher. Additional issues include ways inwhich completed survey forms are collected and specific vehicles areidentified as survey participants. The self-administered questionnairesare sent directly to the surveyor either by the individual vehicleoperators surveyed or by the employer/owner who collects the completedsurveys from the individual vehicle operators. Similar to the workplaceand establishment surveys, better response rates occur when theemployer/owner is responsible for collecting completed questionnairesfrom operators for mail-back. Recent commercial vehicle surveys haveshown that some level of personal assistance (in the form of anestablishment site visit before the assigned travel day) by a surveyfirm representative to address any questions or concerns the recruitedestablishement may have may help increase survey response rates. (Hunt,Stefan and Brownlee, 2006) Chris Simek 10/9/08 12:54 PM   The following primary and secondary traffic datacan be obtained to supplement the information obtained from thecommercial vehicle survey: * Truck classification counts by weight and activity at cordon and/or screenline locations;
* Truck classification counts at area Truck Centers and Weigh Stations;
* U.S. Census Commodity Flow Survey;
* Vehicle Trip Logs from surveyed businesses; and
* Truck classification counts at permanent station locations on state routes and major highways.

Much of this information can be obtained by usingthe traditional data collection methods designed for other types ofsurveys and travel models. For example, the traffic data collected forvehicle intercept surveys can also be used to identify commercialvehicle trucks movements at specific count locations. These data can beused to expand the results of the survey to meet the estimate -Frank Southworth 10/3/08 5:02 PM  commercial vehicle demand   volumes  -Frank Southworth 10/3/08 5:03 PM  currentlyoperating on the roadway network. The cordon and/or screenlinecommercial vehicle data are typically collected at the same locationsestablished for highway network automobile and transit traffic. Thisensures consistency with other models developed within the regionaltravel modeling system such as the development of automobile triptables by trip purpose using the traditional Four-Step modelingapproach.  9.4 Sampling
--------------

Sampling strategies are typically conducted in twostages. The first stage involves the selection of the business/employersample from all the businesses within the study area. The second is theselection of the commercial vehicles (classifications) to be sampledwithin the businesses selected for surveying. The sampling techniquesused for the commercial vehicle surveys can be dependent on othersurvey efforts taking place, especially the workplace and establishmentsurvey, which use similar methods to define the sample ofbusinesses/employers. **Vehicle registration approach.** In order toobtain a reasonable level of information on trips by heavy/largecommercial vehicle classifications, sampling should be stratified byvehicle type. Typically, three to four categories are selected forsampling based on weight or the number of axles for each vehicle.Sampling rates are usually established to achieve an equal number ofresponses by each vehicle type. category.  Or sampling can be weighted based on reported aggregate registrations by vehicle type. -Frank Southworth 10/3/08 5:05 PM Within each category, vehicles selected forcontact should be ordered randomly, by registration number, forexample, to avoid geographical and other biases if all vehicles are notcontacted. **Employer contact approach.** The techniques used to sample workplace and establishment surveys and the issues associated with  -Frank Southworth 10/3/08 5:06 PM inidentifying the sample of employers are discussed in detail inChapter 10.0. If the commercial vehicle survey is being conductedindependently of the workplace and establishment surveys, then it maybe desirable to stratify businesses/employers by NAICS -Frank Southworth 10/3/08 5:07 PM SIC codeand target the sample on industries most likely to operate trucks andother commercial vehicles. Otherwise, many contacts will benon-productive and inappropriate for surveying because of limitedcommercial activity. Sampling of vehicles within thebusinesses will be warranted for establishments with large commercialfleets. This will more than likely be the case for light and mediumvehicles because heavy vehicle operators may be difficult to locate andsubsequently survey.  9.5 Drafting and Constructing the Commercial Vehicle Survey
-------------------------------------------------------------

### Data Elements

Typically, plannersdesign commercial vehicle surveys to determine vehicle ownerinformation such as industry type, number of commercial vehicles, andnumber of employees; vehicle information such as size, weight, and bodytype; and information on vehicle usage for a typical travel day. Foreach commercial trip made on the specified travel day, information tobe obtained is typically desired for origin and destination locations,trip start and end times, odometer readings, land use and/or industrytype uses at the identified origin and destination locations, activityat the stop locations (loading, unloading, meal stop, etc.), stoplocation (on- or off-street), and vehicle contents (commodities) duringthe trip. The level of detail concerning vehicle contentscan vary from simply noting whether the vehicle is empty or loaded, toa detailed commodity description and/or code. Information on thecommodities transported is not a necessary element for most urbanplanning and travel modeling applications, but may be desired forparticular urban, regional or interregional zak patterson 10/23/08 10:58 AM  goods movement studies.### Survey Instruments

Similar to other surveys described in this manual, the survey instrument should be constructed to elicit the appropriate commercial vehicle operator responses to obtain the required data for input into tothe most pressing problems of interest. Where possible such responsesshould be suitable for use in  -Frank Southworth 10/3/08 5:13 PM thetravel demand modeling process. This includes drafting the appropriatequestions and constructing the survey instrument to meet travelmodeling needs. The telephone and self-administered survey approachesare typically constructed differently and require differentquestionnaire designs. The telephone interview questionnaires aretypically more detailed and focus on obtaining other informationbesides travel behavior. For example, surveyors may obtain commodityflow and other non-related travel behavioral data. Telephone interviewquestionnaires are also designed to allow for quick interviewertallying of responses by using personal interview scripts and CATIprograms. The self-administered surveys typically containfewer questions and are targeted for quick response time. The surveyquestionnaires must also be clear and easy for respondents to fill out.Generally, a series of instructions are provided directly on thequestionnaire form to assist vehicle operators with instructions on howto respond to the questionnaire. Return address and postage arerequired for a self-administered survey with that has -Frank Southworth 10/3/08 5:16 PM a questionnaire mail-back option. In addition, it is recommended that the survey team ask commercial vehicle operators to review, test zak patterson 10/23/08 11:00 AM  andcomment on early drafts of the survey questionnaire and materials. Thisstep will ensure that common terminology is used and understood.Survey questions that might appear on a commercial vehicle survey include: * Business/employer location and address;
* If appropriate, the Truck Center/Weigh Station location where the survey was completed;
* Ultimate trip origin and destination including state, city, and nearest intersection;
* Interim trip origins and destinations specifying segments/previousstop locations of the entire trip (related to long-haul operators);
* Start and end times of the entire trip (including all trip segments);
* Major routes used for travel on the highway network;
* Frequency of trips using this particular route by day, week, and month;
* Frequency of trips using alternative routes by day, week, andmonth (including reason for using alternatives such as congestion,time-of-day, etc.);
* Truck classification type and size categories (heavy, medium, light, small commercial);
* Commodity/good that is being transported as well ascharacteristics of the goods (value, etc., including whether or not theload is empty) zak patterson 10/23/08 11:00 AM ; and
* If appropriate, locations for pickup and delivery of goods.

Greatersuccess (i.e. higher rsponse rates) may be obtained by includingquestions that interviewees are likely to want to respond to  -- suchas their opinions about how much, and where, they experience trafficdelays, or regulations that make their job more difficult -FrankSouthworth 10/3/08 5:25 PM The survey instruments from several recent commercial vehicle survey efforts are shown in Figures 9.1 through 9.4.  TheCanadian National Roadside Survey offers an excellent  example of sucha survey instrument (see Earth Tech Canada Inc., 2008, for adescription of the practical issues involved in conducting such asurvey) -- Frank Southworth 11/31/08.   9.6 Pretesting
----------------

As with any survey, pretesting should be carriedout prior to the full implementation and administration of the survey.In the case of the self-administered survey, surveyors can rely onsurveys already carried out in other locations to reduce the need forextensive pretesting. For telephone interview surveys, it is importantthat the surveyor test the entire process to ensure each component ofthe survey is feasible and obtains the appropriate level of informationrequired for analysis and travel modeling purposes. In some cases, self-administered (mail-back)survey pretesting can be administered on a small scale to personswithin your company/agency to identify inconsistencies and other issuesassociated with the format and wording of the questionnaire. Inprevious chapters of this manual, procedures and requirements forpretesting are discussed in greater detail. Insert Figure 9.1 - 1of4 Insert Figure 9.1 - 2 of4 Insert Figure 9.1 - 3of4 Insert Figure 9.1 - 4of4 Insert Figure 9.2 - 1of3 Insert Figure 9.2 - 2of3 Insert Figure 9.2 - 3of3 Insert Figure 9.3 - 1of4 Insert Figure 9.3 - 2of4 Insert Figure 9.3 - 3of4 Insert Figure 9.3 - 4of4 Insert Figure 9.4 - 1of2 Insert Figure 9.4 - 2of2  9.7 Training and Interviewing
-------------------------------

Similar methods for survey training described inother chapters of this manual can be used to train and brief thesurveyor (telephone interviewer) staff designated to conduct thecommercial vehicle survey in the field. For example, the trainingmethods described for the household travel survey can be used for thetelephone interview approach described in this chapter. In addition,the training methods for the *Roadside Handout Survey* describedin Chapter 7.0 and the workplace and establishment surveys inChapter 10.0 are very similar to the self-administered (mail-back)survey described in this chapter. Interviewer and surveyor courtesy andpersuasiveness in getting cooperation from employers and owners isessential to the successful completion of the commercial vehiclesurvey. Identifying the ‘path’ from the initial business/employercontact to the appropriate decision maker who will agree to participateand permit the survey to continue is also essential. This ‘path’ alsoprovides the reliable link between the employer and vehicle operator. In most cases, survey training is conducted priorto the pretest and the implementation of the overall survey with allparticipating surveyors and interviewers. The training session istypically conducted several days before the scheduled pretest andoverall survey dates. Surveyors are briefed on the purpose andprocedures on how to conduct the survey. Items generally covered bysurvey administrators include: * Project briefing describing the background and purpose of the survey and a description of survey assignments for all surveyors;
* Demonstrations of the procedures of the survey administrationdescribing surveyor/interviewer responsibilities for distributingquestionnaires, survey schedules, etc.; and
* Survey procedures checklist provided to the surveyors and/orinterviewers during the initial briefing session, includingauthorization letters and background material.

In commercial vehicle surveys designed foradministration at Truck Center and Weigh Station locations, it isimportant for the survey administrator to coordinate with the surveyorsto ensure that they have been distributed all of the necessary surveymaterials required to successfully carry out the survey. These surveymaterials may include: * Survey forms;
* Record keeping forms;
* Writing instruments;
* Handheld devices for data collection; and zak patterson 10/23/08 11:03 AM
* An authorization letter describing the intent of the survey and the request for survey participation.

The survey administrators must also provideadditional instructions to the surveyors about the distribution offorms to dispatchers and employers, as appropriate. If the surveyquestionnaires have serial numbers, surveyors will be able to track theTruck Center/Weigh Station, and employer locations and times of surveydistribution. Variations of interviewing procedures can be useddepending on the survey method selected and the sample of commercialvehicles to be surveyed. Also, survey notices should be distributedamong businesses/ employers and Truck Centers/Weigh Stations accordingto the survey method chosen.  9.8 Coding
------------

Commercial vehicle survey coding is conductedusing similar procedures used for other surveys described in thismanual. Similar techniques are used to code both the self-administered(mail-back) and telephone interview surveys. The survey questionnairesare typically designed to be self-coding (except for theorigin-destination information), where each survey response can becoded to correspond to its answer check box number. Data coding caneither be completed manually by the surveyors conducting the telephoneinterviews, by CATI, or by vehicle operators completing theself-administered survey. Typically, as with other surveys, data are punchedinto a numerical ASCII data block for a specified width and length asdetermined by the number of questions/responses and sample size of thesurvey. Individual survey questionnaire responses are typically givenan identification number to track the responses for eachbusiness/employer and vehicle operator surveyed. Survey origins anddestinations must be geocoded to identify the geographic locations ofthe commercial vehicle trips surveyed. Chapter 14.0 provides a detaileddiscussion of survey geocoding techniques.  9.9 Cleaning and Editing
--------------------------

Similar data cleaning and editing techniques usedfor other surveys described in this manual are also conducted for thecommercial vehicle survey. As stated in previous chapters, completedquestionnaires should be edited as soon after collection as possible toensure that the proper surveyor techniques have been used and theappropriate information has been obtained. Range checks should beconducted to identify any data inconsistencies that may occur in thecoding process and to verify the accuracy of the data.  Clearly invalidresponses should be checked for and removed before data are analyzed.zak patterson 10/23/08 11:08 AM  Ifdata are collected over the web, this work can be done in real-time andsurvey appropriateness can be examined (and possibly changed) as soonas data starts to come in.zak patterson 10/23/08 11:07 AM   
  


  


  


  


  


  


  


 